---
title: "Strength-finding Interview Phase 5: Make Decision"
layout: post
categories: strength-finding-interview
published: false
description: How to decide on the candidate.
tags: interview
---


> _This is part of a series walking through how a Strength-finding Interview works._<br>
> <br>
> **Walkthrough: Strength-finding Interview**<br>
> <a href="overview">_Overview_</a><br>
> <a href="phase-1">_Phase 1: Confirm Expectations_</a><br>
> <a href="phase-2">_Phase 2: Coordinate Format_</a><br>
> <a href="phase-3">_Phase 3: Run Interview_</a><br>
> <a href="phase-4">_Phase 4: Review Notes_</a><br>
> <a href="phase-5">_Phase 5: Make Decision_</a><br>


Welcome to Phase 5: Make Decision! In this phase we'll make our final decision.

---


The information gathered so far was focused on the candidate's strengths that match the employer's needs. If the candidate did well in the selected areas, you can be more confident that you've seen them at their best. If they did not, maybe they aren't as strong in those areas as they think they are.

This candidate looks like a great fit. They have several useful strengths and even more skills that we need in this role. We decide to hire them and make them an offer.


<details open>
<summary>✉️ <b>Subject: Offer from FlashRecruit!</b> [Sean -> Jessie]</summary>

> *To: Jessie*<br>
> *From: Sean*<br>
> *Date: 2019-06-06*
>
> ---
>
> **Hello Jessie!**
>
> We were very impressed with you during your interview and would like to make you an offer!
>
> Please see the offer letter attached. We hope you accept!
>
> We hope to have a response within a week, but if you need more time to make this very important decision, let us know and we can find something that works best for everyone.
>
> Let me know if you have any questions.

</details>


Then, the candidate hopefully accepts and everyone is excited to have them start!


# Next Up

In the next section, we'll wrap up the discussion and provide some resources.
