---
title: "Strength-finding Interview Phase 1: Confirm Expectations"
layout: post
categories: strength-finding-interview
published: false
description: How to set expectations for the candidate and recruiter.
tags: interview
---

> _This is part of a series walking through how a Strength-finding Interview at FlashRecruit works._<br>
> <br>
> **Walkthrough: Strength-finding Interview**<br>
> <a href="overview">_Overview_</a><br>
> <a href="phase-1">_Phase 1: Confirm Expectations_</a><br>
> <a href="phase-2">_Phase 2: Coordinate Format_</a><br>
> <a href="phase-3">_Phase 3: Run Interview_</a><br>
> <a href="phase-4">_Phase 4: Review Notes_</a><br>
> <a href="phase-5">_Phase 5: Make Decision_</a><br>


Welcome to Phase 1: Confirm Expectations! In this phase we'll cover the initial contact with the candidate. The goal is to make sure both candidate and recruiter understand the expectations of both sides before progressing.

---

Schedule a 30-minute call to with the candidate to discuss the work environment, growth of the candidate, direction of the business, and compensation expectations.


<details open>
<summary>🗓 <b>Calendar Invite: "Call: Sean <> Jessie</b> [Sean -> Jessie]</summary>

> *To: Jessie*<br>
> *From: Sean*<br>
> *Date: 2019-06-01 9:30 - 10:00am*
>
> ---
>
> Hey Jessie! Let's use this time to cover the following.
>
> Topics:
> - work: collaborating in a remote environment
> - growth: what you are looking for in your next role
> - direction: where FlashRecruit comes from and where it's going
> - compensation: expectations, not history
> - dealbreakers: absolute requirements
>
> Request:
>
> Especially on our remote team, technical writing is a critical skill to being a successful team member. Can you provide a technical writing sample? This can be some documentation you wrote, a couple of Pull Request descriptions you are proud of, a persuasive email you sent to a colleague, or anything else that informs or persuades involving technical, academic, or philosophical aspects of your work.
>
> If nothing like this is sharable, let us know and we'll figure something else out together. Please don't let this requirement cause you to self-select out of the interview process.
>
> ---
>
> I'm also happy to discuss any other questions you have about the role!
>
> Interview Process: {{link to full description of process}}<br>
> Job Description: {{link to the job description}}

</details>


Let's explore those topics in more detail.

**Work:** Discuss the current working environment including culture, physical/remote space, collaboration, and project management. Discuss the candidates preferences in those areas.

**Growth:** Discuss where the candidate believes they are in their career and skillsets. Discuss where they'd like to go in the future.

**Direction:** Discuss where the company is heading from both a product and business perspective.

**Compensation:** Discuss the compensation expectations of the candidate and the compensation range of the position. Include stock, bonus, and benefits. Make it clear that you do not discuss compensation history.

**Deal Breakers:** Discuss any absolute requirements that either you have for the candidate or they have for employment. These must be clearly discussed in this phase.

Near the end of the call, remind the candidate of the next steps. Ask them if they have any final questions.

Make note of any follow up tasks you may want to do before deciding to bring them in for an interview. These could be calling references, reviewing work samples, confirming details of employment you didn't have at hand for the candidate, etc.


<details open>
<summary>📝 <b>Expectation Setting Notes: Jessie</b> [Sean]</summary>

> *Date: 2019-06-01*
>
> ---
>
> Work: They've not worked full-time in a remote environment before,
> but have worked remotely on their team for up to a week at a time.
> They enjoyed it and felt productive during that time.
> In 1:1s, we'll want to keep an eye on focus and communication levels
> to help them through that transition to meet expectations.
>
> Growth: They would like to grow in technical leadership skills, such as mentorship, giving good feedback, and breaking down complex tasks.
>
> Compensation: They were amenable to our compensation range for the position,
> but would prefer higher equity and lower salary, given a choice.
>
> Deal Breakers: Not interested in working somewhere that uses "go fast and break things"
> to mean "write bad code and move on".
>
> To Do:
> - reference call: Ashish about working a remote environment
> - ask HR: what's the largest life insurance policy we offer?

</details>

After completing your follow ups, you should be certain that a candidate should or should not progress to the next phase. If you are not, you either have more follow ups to do or make a decision with what you have.

If you are low on interviewable candidates, this is a hard to fill position, or you suspect your biases are making you hesitant, consider progressing the candidate to the next stage. If you already have a lot of interviews or the position is not hard to fill, consider passing on the candidate.


<details open>
<summary>📝 <b>Phase 1 Notes: Jessie</b> [Sean]</summary>

> *Date: 2019-06-02*
>
> ---
>
> Pros:
> - have a background that roughly matches our tech stack
> - seem very interested in what we're building
> - appreciate our approach to recruiting and performance reviews
> - have a growth mindset
>
> Cons:
> - never worked full-time remotely before
> - tech skillset doesn't include Ember
>
> The pros are strong and the cons can be addressed relatively easily, except maybe managing the transition to remote work. We can certainly offer support and guidance here, but success in that area will ultimately come from within. After talking to their past colleague Ashish about working remote with the candidate for brief periods of time, they did affirm that communication was frequent and detailed. No concerns were raised about this arrangement.
>
> Decision: This candidate looks like a good initial match for the team. Let's bring them in for the interview!

</details>


# Next Up

In the next phase, we'll start the process of customizing an interview format for the candidate that highlights their strengths.

