---
title: "Strength-finding Interview Phase 2: Coordinate Interview"
published: false
description: How to decide on the actual interview format.
tags: interview
---


> _This is part of a series on how to conduct a Strength-finding Interview._<br>
> 
> **Series: Strength-finding Interview**<br>
> <a href="overview">_Overview_</a><br>
> <a href="phase-1">_Phase 1: Confirm Expectations_</a><br>
> <a href="phase-2">_Phase 2: Coordinate Format_</a><br>
> <a href="phase-3">_Phase 3: Run Interview_</a><br>
> <a href="phase-4">_Phase 4: Review Notes_</a><br>
> <a href="phase-5">_Phase 5: Make Decision_</a><br>
> <a href="summary">_Summary_</a>

Welcome to Phase 2: Coordinate Interview! In this phase we'll work with the candidate to find the overlap between their strengths and the company needs. Then, we'll structure the interview format based on that overlap.

---

### Collaborate on the Format

As a candidate, have you ever missed out on a job and thought "If only I could have shown them my skill in X"? As part of a hiring decision, have you ever declined a candidate who went somewhere else and performed very well? There are certainly cases where it still wouldn't have worked out if the candidate was hired in these situations, but they should certainly be making it through the process more often.

This phase starts with a request for information from the candidate. The request boils down to "what are your strengths that overlap with our needs?"


<details open>
<summary>✉️ <b>Subject: FlashRecruit Interview Process</b> [Sean -> Jessie]</summary>

> *To: Jessie*<br>
> *From: Sean*<br>
> *Date: 2019-06-03*
>
> ---
>
> **Hello Jessie!**
>
> Welcome to Phase 2 of our interview process!
>
>     Phase 1: [Audio Call] Confirm Expectations
>     **Phase 2: [Email] Interview Negotiation**
>     Phase 3: [Video Call] Strength Finding Interview
>     Phase 4: [Variable] Follow Ups
>     Phase 5: [Video Call] Meet the Founders
>
> The goal here is to really highlight your strengths. Take some time think about what your strengths are, what our problem domain looks like, and how those overlap.
>
> Our stack is:
>
> - Node.js (API)
> - Ember (Web Client)
> - React (Deprecated Web Client)
> - React Native (Mobile Apps)
> - Heroku/S3/RDS (Infrastructure)
>
> Our problem space is the recruiting software landscape. We're currently focused on improving our job board and streamlining customer on-boarding.
>
> That means:
>
> - integrating with third party APIs
> - building and running recurring processing tasks
> - consuming XML feeds
> - iterating a relational-database-backed API
> - iterating a web client for a job board
> - iterating a web chat widget
> - rethinking the job board
>
> Please send me your thoughts on what your strengths are and what would best highlight them. This doesn't have to be lengthy. We'll work together to get a set list in place. Then we'll tailor the interview to that list.
>
> Example Strengths:
>
> - Data Modeling a user and authentication system with a focus on security
> - Finding and fixing poor DB performance
> - Turning a bug report into an actionable bug fix
> - TDDing a feature end to end
> - Refactoring a too-large model
> - Breaking down large tasks into smaller ones
> - Optimizing a UX flow
> - Designing new views
> - Documenting a gnarly part of the system
>
> Then, we'll schedule the actual interview. We like to book 4 hours for that, but if that large of a block of time doesn't work, we can split it up.
>
> If coding in an interview setting won't show you at your best, we can provide a homework problem for you to tackle or you can provide a suitable work sample. In those alternative cases, the scheduled interview would involve talking through homework or work sample.
>
> If you have any questions or concerns about any of this, please let me know.
>
> Thanks!<br>
> ~Sean Massa

</details>


The candidate will respond with their strengths. If they shared some relevant strengths, select a couple to build into the interview. If not, either (1) select less relevant strengths as a way to assess their ability to master something or (2) follow up with them to see if there are other strengths you could focus on.


<details open>
<summary> ️✉️ <b>Subject: My Strengths</b> [Jessie -> Sean]</summary>

> *To: Sean*<br>
> *From: Jessie*<br>
> *Date: 2019-03-03*
>
> ---
>
> These are my strengths that seem to overlap with your needs:
>
> - Technical Writing
> - API Design
> - Outside-in TDD of a Feature
> - System Architecture Design
> - Breaking Large Tasks into Smaller Tasks
>
> I don't typically do well programming in an interview setting. My past work is all private, which means I have no work samples I can provide. Can we do the homework problem you mentioned instead? I'm most comfortable with Node.js for APIs and Jade templates for web sites.
>
> Thanks!<br>
> ~Jessie

</details>


### Interview Modules

Interview Modules are how you can find balance between consistent and adaptive interview experiences for candidates. The format is flexible around which modules are chosen, but a given module should remain as consistent as possible across candidates.

**Selection:** Some modules will still apply to most candidates. In our interviews, we typically do the same 2 modules for everyone, then leave room for 2 other modules to be flexible towards the candidate's strengths. Modules should also span technical implementation skills as well as collaboration/communication skills.

**Format:** Collaboration is very important. If the candidate is comfortable with it, try to make at least 1 large module involve collaboration with a team member. That doesn't have to be live coding in a high-pressure situation. Collaboration could be talking through an architectural design, planning a project, triaging (not necessarily fixing) a bug, or the like.

**Construction:** As you use this process more, you'll build more and more modules. This will require some work, but it's also worth the effort. When building modules, try to make them as realistic as possible. The domain should be the same or analogous to your domain by default, although you can shift this per candidate too. The tasks should be representative of the work required to do the job. Try to be flexible on technology choices, as well. Candidates will do a better job if they can pick tools they know to solve a problem.

For our job, we could really use someone with strong API Design and high-quality execution. We also want to assess how well they will work in a remote environment.

Let's set up an interview that highlights the candidate's "API Design" and "Testing". We already asked for a technical writing sample and the homework problem includes a writing section as well. We can dig further into how well the candidate works in a remote environment during the Q&A.


<details open>
<summary>✉️ <b>Subject: Interview Agenda</b> [Sean -> Jessie]</summary>

> *To: Jessie*<br>
> *From: Sean*<br>
> *Date: 2019-06-04*
>
> ---
>
> We're excited for your interview!
>
> **Proposed Interview Format**
>
> Here's a breakdown of the interview format we'd like to use. Let me know if you have any comments, questions, or concerns.
>
> ```
> - Intro and Overview (15m)
> - Homework Discussion: Chat App (1hr)
> - Break (10m)
> - Collaborate: API Design (1hr)
> - Collaborate: Refactoring and Testing (45m)
> - Break (5m)
> - Two-directional Q&A (45m)
> ```
>
> **Intro and Overview**
>
> We'll walk through the general landscape of FlashRecruit's industry and architecture. This will help us get things flowing before digging into the other modules.
>
> **Homework Discussion: Chat App**
>
> *Strength:* Technical Implementation
>
> We'll discuss the decisions you made and the product you produced for the homework assignment. This will include what you would plan to do if you had more time.
>
> **API Design**
>
> *Strength: "Designed and implemented APIs in Node.js"*
>
> We’ll take a page from our system and talk through how we’d go about architecting the API of it from scratch. We’ll dig into general strategy, URL schemes, wire formats, resource relationships, data backing, performance monitoring and optimization, and wherever else you have related skill.
>
> **Collaborate: Refactoring and Testing**
>
> *Strengths: Refactoring and Testing*
>
> We'll discuss refactoring and testing strategies in general and with a specific example from our system.
>
> **Two-directional Q&A**
>
> We’ll take this time to ask more specific questions about each other.
>
> **Summary**
>
> Please do the following:
>
> - provide a technical writing sample
> - confirm the interview format
> - provide availability for a 4-hour block in the next week or so

</details>


<details open>
<summary>✉️ <b>Re: Interview Agenda</b>  [Jessie -> Sean]</summary>

> *To: Sean*<br>
> *From: Jessie*<br>
> *Date: 2019-06-05*
>
> ---
>
> That sounds great! I'm available anytime tomorrow from 9am - 5pm central time.
>
> I have some blog posts that I think will serve as my technical writing sample. Please let me know if you'd like for me to provide something else.
>
> {{links to blog posts}}

</details>


<details open>
<summary>🗓 <b>Invite: FlashRecruit Interview</b> [Sean -> Jessie]</summary>

> Here's a breakdown of the interview format we agreed to use. Let me know if you have any comments, questions, or concerns.
>
> ```
> - Intro and Overview (15m)
> - Homework Discussion: Chat App (1hr)
> - Break (10m)
> - Collaborate: API Design (1hr)
> - Collaborate: Refactoring and Testing (45m)
> - Break (5m)
> - Two-directional Q&A (45m)
> ```

</details>

Now that we have the format agreed upon, we can construct the assessment scorecard for this candidate. We'll use this scorecard to assess the candidate. I'll discuss it more in a later section, but for now, let's translate the modules into assessments.

Each module can assess multiple skills, some deeply and others less so. There can also be a lot of overlap. A scorecard format helps us gather notes from multiple sources about a specific skill.

Below are the modules we're going to run along with the skills we can capture signals for in those modules.


<details open>
<summary>📝 <b>Assessment Plan: Jessie</b> [Sean]</summary>

> - **Homework Discussion: Chat App**
>     - UI Component Architecture
>     - UI Component Development
>     - Testing
>     - CSS Implementation
>     - Technical Writing
>     - Breaking Down Tasks
>     - Maintainable Code
> - **Collaborate: API Design**
>     - API Design
>     - Testing
>     - Technical Writing
>     - Collaboration
> - **Collaborate: Refactoring and Testing**
>     - Refactoring
>     - Testing
>     - Working with Existing Code
>     - Culture: Empathy and Understanding for Past Decisions
>     - Collaboration
>     - Maintainable Code
> - **Two-directional Q&A**
>     - Giving Feedback
>     - Receiving Feedback
>     - Remote Work
>     - Collaboration
>     - Continuous Learning

</details>


We'll use this to take notes during Phase 3.


# Next Up

In the next phase, we'll run the actual interview based on our plan from Phase 2.
